Chapter 13 The Merchandising of Virtue
Sontag is about Sontag - Virtue is what you do when nobody is looking - Have the guts to be unpopular - Meetings breed meetings - Call someone lonely on Saturdays after tennis
Lycurgus, the Spartan lawmaker, responded to a suggestion to allow democracy there, saying "begin with your own family."
I will always remember my encounter with the writer and cultural icon Susan Sontag, largely because I met the great Benoit Mandelbrot on the same day.
It took place in 2001, two months after the terrorist event of September, in a radio station in New York.
Sontag, who was being interviewed, was piqued by the idea of a fellow who "studies randomness" and came to engage me.
When she discovered that I was a trader, she blurted out that she was "against the market system" and turned her back to me as I was in mid-sentence, just to humiliate me (note here that courtesy is an application of the Silver Rule), while her assistant gave me a look as if I had been convicted of child killing.
I sort of justified her behavior in order to forget the incident, imagining that she lived in some rural commune, grew her own vegetables, wrote with pencil and paper, engaged in barter transactions, that type of stuff.
No, she did not grow her own vegetables, it turned out.
Two years later, I accidentally found her obituary (I waited a decade and a half before writing about the incident to avoid speaking ill of the departed).
People in publishing were complaining about her rapacity; she had squeezed her publisher, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, for what would be several million dollars today for a novel.
She shared, with a girlfriend, a mansion in New York City, later sold for $28 million.
Sontag probably felt that insulting people with money inducted her into some unimpeachable sainthood, exempting her from having skin in the game.
It is immoral to be in opposition to the market system and not live (somewhere in Vermont or Northwestern Afghanistan) in a hut or cave isolated from it.
But there is worse:
It is much more immoral to claim virtue without fully living with its direct consequences.
This will be the main topic of this chapter: exploiting virtue for image, personal gain, careers, social status, these kinds of things - and by personal gain I mean anything that does not share the downside of a negative action.
By contrast with Sontag, I have met a few people who live their public ideas.
Ralph Nader, for instance, leads the life of a monk, identical to a member of a monastery in the sixteenth century.
And the secular saint Simone Weil, while coming from the French Jewish upper class, spent a year in a car factory so the working class could be something other than an abstract construct for her.
THE PUBLIC AND THE PRIVATE
As we saw with the interventionistas, a certain class of theoretical people can despise the details of reality.
If you manage to convince yourself that you are right in theory, you don't really care how your ideas affect others.
Your ideas give you a virtuous status that makes you impervious to how they affect others.
Likewise, if you believe that you are "helping the poor" by spending money on PowerPoint presentations and international meetings, the type of meetings that lead to more meetings (and PowerPoint presentations) you can completely ignore individuals - the poor become an abstract reified construct that you do not encounter in your real life.
Your efforts at conferences give you license to humiliate them in person.
Hillary Monsanto-Malmaison, sometimes known as Hillary Clinton, found it permissible to heap abuse on secret service agents.
I was recently told that a famous Canadian socialist environmentalist, with whom I was part of a lecture series, abused waiters in restaurants, between lectures on equity, diversity, and fairness.
Kids with rich parents talk about "class privilege" at privileged colleges such as Amherst - but in one instance, one of them could not answer Dinesh D'Souza's simple and logical suggestion: Why don't you go to the registrar's office and give your privileged spot to the minority student next in line?
Clearly the defense given by people under such a situation is that they want others to do so as well - they require a systemic solution to every local perceived problem of injustice.
I find that immoral.
I know of no ethical system that allows you to let someone drown without helping him because other people are not helping, no system that says, "I will save people from drowning only if others too save other people from drowning."
Which brings us to the principle:
If your private life conflicts with your intellectual opinion, it cancels your intellectual ideas, not your private life.
And a solution to the vapid universalism we discussed in the Prologue:
If your private actions do not generalize, then you cannot have general ideas.
This is not strictly about ethics, but information.
If a car salesman tries to sell you a Detroit car while driving a Honda, he is signaling that the wares he is touting may have a problem.
THE VIRTUE MERCHANTS
In about every hotel chain, from Argentina to Kazakhstan, the bathroom will have a sign meant to get your attention: PROTECT THE ENVIRONMENT.
They want you to hold off from sending the towels to the laundry and reuse them for a while, because avoiding excess laundry saves them tens of thousands of dollars a year.
This is similar to the salesperson telling you what is good for you when it is mostly (and centrally) good for him.
Hotels, of course, love the environment, but you can bet that they wouldn't advertise it so loudly if it weren't good for their bottom line.
So these global causes - poverty (particularly children's), the environment, justice for some minority trampled upon by colonial powers, or some as-yet-unknown gender that will be persecuted - are now the last refuge of the scoundrel advertising virtue.
Virtue is not something you advertise.
It is not an investment strategy.
It is not a cost-cutting scheme.
It is not a bookselling (or, worse, concert-ticket-selling) strategy.
Now I have wondered why, by the Lindy effect, there is so little mention of what is called virtue signaling in the ancient texts.
How could it be new?
Well, it is not new, but was not seen as prevalent enough in the past to warrant much complaining and get named a vice.
But mention there is; let's check Matthew 6:1-4, where the highest mitzvah is the one done secretly:
Be careful not to practice your righteousness in front of others to be seen by them.
If you do, you will have no reward from your Father in heaven.
So when you give to the needy, do not announce it with trumpets, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and on the streets, to be honored by others.
Truly I tell you, they have received their reward in full.
But when you give to the needy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing, so that your giving may be in secret.
Then your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you.
TO BE OR TO SEEM?
The investor Charlie Munger once said: "Look it.
Would you rather be the world's greatest lover, but have everyone think you're the world's worst lover?
Or would you rather be the world's worst lover but have everyone think you're the world's greatest lover?"
As usual, if it makes sense, it has to be in the classics, where it is found under the name esse quam videri, which I translate as to be or to be seen as such.
It can be found in Cicero, Sallust, even Machiavelli, who, characteristically, inverted it to videri quam esse, "show rather than be."
SIMONY
At some point in history, if you had money, you could part with some of it to exonerate your sins.
The opulent could clear their conscience thanks to the purchase of ecclesiastical favors and indulgences, and while the practice peaked in the ninth and tenth centuries, it continued in a milder and more subtle form later, and most certainly contributed to the exasperation with church practices that led to the Reformation.
Simony was a convenient way for the church to raise funds, by selling offices, and everybody was happy with the arrangement.
Same with indulgences: the buyer had an inexpensive option on paradise, the seller was selling something that cost nothing.
It was, as we call it in trading, "free money."
Yet technically it was a violation of canon law, as it commuted something temporal for the spiritual and intemporal.
It was most certainly Lindy compatible: technically, indulgences were not markedly different from the pagan practice of giving offerings to propitiate the gods, a part of which went to line the pockets of the high priest.
Now consider publicly giving a million dollars to some "charity."
Part of that money will be spent to advertise that you are giving money, a charity being defined as some organization that aims to make no profit, and to "spend" a chunk of the money on its specialization: meetings, future fundraising, and multiplicative intercompany emails (all meant to help a country after an earthquake, for instance).
Do you see any difference between this and simony and indulgences?
Indeed, simony and indulgences reincarnated themselves in lay society in the form of charity dinners (for some reason, black tie), of people feeling useful engaging in the otherwise selfish activity of running marathons - no longer selfish as it aims at saving other people's kidneys (as if kidneys could not be saved by people writing checks to save kidneys), and of executives giving their names to buildings so they could be remembered as virtuous.
So you can scam the world for a billion; all you need to do is spend part of it, say, a million or two, to enter the section of paradise reserved for the "givers."
Now, I am not saying that all those who put their names on a building are necessarily non-virtuous and buying a spot in paradise.
Many are forced by peer and social pressures to do so, so it could be a way to get some people off their backs.
We have argued that virtue is not an ornament, not something one can buy.
Let us go a step beyond and see where virtue requires skin in the game in terms of risk taking, particularly when it is one's reputation that is at risk.
VIRTUE IS ABOUT OTHERS AND THE COLLECTIVE
From the scaling property, we can safely establish that virtue is doing something for the collective, particularly when such an action conflicts with your narrowly defined interests.
Virtue isn't in just being nice to people others are prone to care about.
So true virtue lies mostly in also being nice to those who are neglected by others, the less obvious cases, those people the grand charity business tends to miss.
Or people who have no friends and would like someone once in while to just call them for a chat or a cup of fresh roasted Italian-style coffee.
UNPOPULAR VIRTUE
Further, the highest form of virtue is unpopular.
This does not mean that virtue is inherently unpopular, or correlates with unpopularity, only that unpopular acts signal some risk taking and genuine behavior.
Courage is the only virtue you cannot fake.
If I were to describe the perfect virtuous act, it would be to take an uncomfortable position, one penalized by the common discourse.
Let us take an example.
For some reason, during the Syrian war, thanks to Qatari-funded public relations firms, the monoculture succeeded in penalizing everyone who stood against jihadi headcutters (the Syrian so-called rebels who in fact were fighting for the establishment of a Salafi-Wahhabi state in Syria).
The labels "Assadist" and "baby killer" were designed to scare journalists from questioning any support for these jihadists.
And it is always the children.
Recall that Monsanto shills often accuse those opposing them of "starving the children."
Sticking up for truth when it is unpopular is far more of a virtue, because it costs you something - your reputation.
If you are a journalist and act in a way that risks ostracism, you are virtuous.
Some people only express their opinions as part of mob shaming, when it is safe to do so, and, in the bargain, think that they are displaying virtue.
This is not virtue but vice, a mixture of bullying and cowardice.
TAKE RISK
Finally, when young people who "want to help mankind" come to me asking, "What should I do?
I want to reduce poverty, save the world," and similar noble aspirations at the macro-level, my suggestion is:
1) Never engage in virtue signaling;
2) Never engage in rent-seeking;
3) You must start a business.
Put yourself on the line, start a business.
Yes, take risk, and if you get rich (which is optional), spend your money generously on others.
We need people to take (bounded) risks.
The entire idea is to move the descendants of Homo sapiens away from the macro, away from abstract universal aims, away from the kind of social engineering that brings tail risks to society.
Doing business will always help (because it brings about economic activity without large-scale risky changes in the economy); institutions (like the aid industry) may help, but they are equally likely to harm (I am being optimistic; I am certain that except for a few most do end up harming).
Courage (risk taking) is the highest virtue.
We need entrepreneurs.
Chapter 14 Peace, Neither Ink nor Blood
Arabs fighting to the last Palestinian - Where are the lions?
- Italians don't die easily - Make historians build rockets - Commerce makes people equal (or unequal, but that's another subject)
One of the problems of the interventionista - wanting to get involved in other people's affairs "in order to help" - results in disrupting some of the peace-making mechanisms that are inherent in human affairs, a combination of collaboration and strategic hostility.
As we saw in the Prologue 1, the error continues because someone else is paying the price.
I speculate that had IYIs and their friends not gotten involved, problems such as the Israeli-Palestinian one would have been solved, sort of - and both parties, especially the Palestinians, would have been better off.
As I am writing these lines the problem has lasted seventy years, with way too many cooks in the same tiny kitchen, most of whom never have to taste the food.
I conjecture that when you leave people alone, they tend to settle for practical reasons.
People on the ground, those with skin in the game, are not too interested in geopolitics or grand abstract principles, but rather in having bread on the table, beer (or, for some, nonalcoholic fermented beverages such as yoghurt drinks) in the refrigerator, and good weather at outdoor family picnics.
Also they don't want to be humiliated in their human contact with others.
For imagine the absurdity of Arab states prodding the Palestinians to fight for their principles while their potentates are sitting in carpeted alcohol-free palaces (with well-stocked refrigerators full of nonalcoholic fermented beverages such as yoghurt) while the recipients of their advice live in refugee camps.
Had the Palestinians settled in 1947, they would have been better off.
But the idea was to throw the Jews and neo-crusaders in the Mediterranean; Arab rhetoric came from Arab parties who were hundreds, thousands of miles away arguing for "principles" when Palestinians were displaced, living in tents.
Then came the war of 1948.
Had Palestinians settled then, things would have worked out.
But, no, there were "principles."
But then came the war of 1967.
Now they feel they would be lucky if they recovered the territory lost in 1967.
Then in 1992 came the Oslo peace treaty, from the top.
No peace proceeds from bureaucratic ink.
If you want peace, make people trade, as they have done for millennia.
They will be eventually forced to work something out.
We are largely collaborative - except when institutions get in the way.
I surmise that if we put those "people wanting to help" in the State Department on paid vacation to do ceramics, pottery, or whatever low-testosterone people do when they take a sabbatical, it would be great for peace.
Further, these people tend to see everything as geopolitics, as if the world was polarized into two big players, not a collection of people with diverse interests.
To spite Russia, the State Department is urged to perpetuate the war in Syria, which in fact just punishes Syrians.
Peace from the top differs from real peace: consider that today's Morocco, Egypt, and to some extent Saudi Arabia, with more or less overtly pro-Israeli governments (with well-stocked refrigerators full of nonalcoholic fermented drinks such as yoghurt), have local populations conspicuously hostile to Jews.
Compare this to Iran, with a local population that is squarely pro-Western and tolerant of Jews.
Yet some people with no skin in the game who have read too much about the Treaty of Westphalia (and not enough on complex systems) still insist on conflating relations between countries with relations between governments.
MARS VS. SATURN
If you understand nothing about the problem (like D.C. pundits) and have no skin in the game, then everything is seen through the prism of geopolitics.
For these ignorant pundits, it is all Iran vs. Saudi Arabia, the U.S. vs. Russia, Mars vs. Saturn.
I recall, during the Lebanese war, noticing how the local conflict was metamorphosed into an "Israel vs. Iran" problem.
I described in The Black Swan how war journalists who came to Lebanon got all their information from other war journalists who came to Lebanon, hence they could live in a parallel world without ever seeing the true problems - absence of skin in the game does wonders in distorting information.
But to those of us on the ground, the objective was to make things work and have a life, not sacrifice our existence for the sake of geopolitics.
Real people are interested in commonalities and peace, not conflicts and wars.
Let us now examine history as it runs by itself, as opposed to what's seen by "intellectuals" and institutions.
WHERE ARE THE LIONS?
As I was writing Antifragile, I spent some time in South Africa in a wild reserve, doing Safari-style tours during part of the day and tinkering with the book in the afternoons.
I went to the reserve to "see the lions."
In an entire week I only saw one lion and it was such a big event that it caused a traffic jam of tourists coming from all the neighboring camp-style resorts.
People kept shouting "kuru" in Zulu as if they had found gold.
Meanwhile, on the twice-daily failed tours to find the lions, I saw giraffes, elephants, zebras, wild boars, impalas, more impalas, even more impalas.
Everyone else was like me, looking for kurus and getting peaceful animals: a South African fellow we encountered in another car in the middle of the savannah, after the usual sighting of boring (and bored) animals, cracked the joke while pointing his finger at a hill: "Look, we saw two giraffes and three impalas over there."
It turned out that I had squarely made the error that I warn against, of mistaking the lurid for the empirical: there are very, very few predators compared to what one can call collaborative animals.
The camp in the wild reserve was next to a watering hole, and in the afternoon it got crowded with hundreds of animals of different species who apparently got along rather well with one another.
But of the thousands of animals that I spotted cumulatively, the image of the lion in a state of majestic calm dominates my memory.
It may make sense from a risk-management point of view to overestimate the role of the lion - but not in our interpretation of world affairs.
If the "law of the jungle" means anything, it means collaboration for the most part, with a few perceptional distortions caused by our otherwise well-functioning risk-management intuitions.
Even predators end up in some type of arrangement with their prey.
HISTORY SEEN FROM THE EMERGENCY ROOM
History is largely peace punctuated by wars, rather than wars punctuated by peace.
The problem is that we humans are prone to the availability heuristic, by which the salient is mistaken for the statistical, and the conspicuous and emotional effect of an event makes us think it is occurring more regularly than in reality.
This helps us to be prudent and careful in daily life, forcing us to add an extra layer of protection, but it does not help with scholarship.
For when you read histories of international affairs, you might fall under the illusion that history is mostly wars, that states like to fight as a default condition, whenever they have the chance, and that the only coordination between entities takes place when two countries have a "strategic" alliance against a common danger.
Or some unification under a top-down bureaucratic structure.
Recent peace among European states is attributed to the rule of verbose bureaucrats devoid of "toxic masculinity" (the most recent pathologification in universities), rather than American and Soviet occupation.
We are fed a steady diet of histories of wars, fewer histories of peace.
As a trader, I was trained to look for the first question people forget to ask: who wrote these books?
Well, historians, international affairs scholars, and policy experts did.
Can these people be fooled?
Let's be polite and say that they are in the majority no rocket scientists, and operate under a structural bias.
It looks like, in spite of quite a bit of lip service and introspection, an empirically rigorous approach in history and international relations is rare.
First, there are problems of "overfitting," overnarrating, extracting too much via positiva and not enough via negativa from past data.
Even in the empirical sciences, positive results ("this works") tends to get more press than negative ones ("this doesn't work") so it should be no surprise that historians and international relations scholars fall squarely into the same trap.
Second, these scholars, as non-rocket scientists, fail to get a central mathematical property, confusing intensity with frequency.
In the five centuries preceding the unification of Italy, there was supposed to be "a lot of warfare" ravaging the place.
Therefore, many of these scholars insist, unification "brought peace."
But more than six hundred thousand Italians died in the Great War, during the "period of stability," almost one order of magnitude higher than all the cumulative fatalities in the five hundred years preceding it.
Many of the "conflicts" that took place between states or statelings were between professional soldiers, often mercenaries, and much of the population was unaware of them.
Now, in my experience, after presenting these facts, I am almost always confronted with "Still, there were more wars and instability."
This is the Robert Rubin trade argument, that trades that lose money infrequently are more stable, even if they end up eventually wiping you out.
Third, there is a problem of representativeness, or to what extent the narrated maps to the empirical.
Historians and international affairistas who reach us are more motivated by stories of conflict than by organic collaboration on the ground between a broader set of noninstitutional players, merchants, barbers, doctors, money changers, plumbers, prostitutes, and others.
Peace and commerce might be of some interest, but it's not quite what interests people - and while the French Annales school brought some awareness that history is the whole life of an organism, not episodes of lurid wars, they failed to change much in the minds of the neighboring disciplines such as international affairs.
Even I, while aware of the point and writing a chapter on it, tend to find accounts of real life boring.
Fourth, as we said before with the research done by Captain Mark Weisenborn, Pasquale Cirillo, and myself, accounts of past wars are fraught with overestimation biases.
The lurid rises to the surface and keeps rising from account to account.
Journalism is about "events," not absence of events, and many historians and policy scholars are glorified journalists with high fact-checking standards who allow themselves to be a little boring in order to be taken seriously.
But being boring doesn't make them scientists, nor does "fact checking" make them empirical, as these scholars miss the notion of absence of data points and silent facts.
Learning from the Russian school of probability makes one conscious of the need to think in terms of one-sided inequalities: what is absent from the data should be taken into account - absence of Black Swans in the record doesn't mean these were not there.
The record is insufficient, and such asymmetry needs to be permanently present in one's analysis.
Silent evidence should be the driver.
Reading a history book, without putting its events in perspective, offers a similar bias to reading an account of life in New York seen from an emergency room at Bellevue Hospital.
So always keep in mind that historians and policy scholaristas are selected from a cohort of people who derive their knowledge from books, not real life and business.
The same is true for State Department employees, since these are not hired among adventurers and doers, but students of these scholars.
Let's say it bluntly: spending part of your life reading archives in the stacks of the Yale Library doesn't fit the nonacademic temperament of someone who has to be aware and watch his back, say, a debt-collector for the Mafia or a pit speculator in fast commodities.
(If you don't get this, you are an academic.)
Let us take for example the standard account of Arabs in Spain, Turks in parts of the Byzantine Empire, or Arabs and Byzantines.
From a geopolitics standpoint, you would see all of these situations as a tug-of-war.
Yes, there was a tug-of-war, but not in the sense that you suspect.
Merchants were doing business very actively during these periods.
My own existence as Greek-Orthodox of Byzantine rite living under Islam (though at a safe, very safe physical distance from Sunni Muslims) is witness to such collaboration.
And never discount the theological rationalizations to justify collaboration with the economic powers - before the discovery of America, the business center of gravity was in the East.
The expression "Better the turban of the Turk than the tiara of the Pope!"
originated with the Grand Duke Lucas Notaras, who negotiated a friendship treaty with the Ottomans, and was repeated at various stages in history.
It is also attributed to Saint Mark of Ephesus, and was often shouted by Balkan peasants to justify siding with the Turks against their Catholic lords.
As the reader will know by now, I have myself lived through the worst part of the civil war in Lebanon.
Except for areas near the Green Line, it didn't feel like war.
But those reading about it in history books will not understand my experience.
NEXT
We just saw in Book 6 various asymmetries in life coming from largely undetected agency problems, where absence of skin in the game contaminates fields and produces distortions.
But recall that religion is about skin in the game - not quite about "belief."
We will spend the next few chapters with what people call "religion," which will take us deeper and deeper into the core of the book: rationality and risk bearing.
Book 7 Religion, Belief, and Skin in the Game
Chapter 15 They Don't Know What They Are Talking About When They Talk about Religion
The more they talk.
the less you understand - Law or nomous?
- In religion, as in other things, you pay for the label
My lifetime motto is that mathematicians think in (well, precisely defined and mapped) objects and relations, jurists and legal thinkers in constructs, logicians in maximally abstract operators, and…fools in words.
Two people can be using the same word, meaning different things, yet continue the conversation, which is fine for coffee, but not when making decisions, particularly policy decisions affecting others.
But it is easy to trip them, as Socrates did, simply by asking them what they think they mean by what they said - hence philosophy was born as rigor in discourse and disentanglement of mixed-up notions, in precise opposition to the sophist's promotion of rhetoric.
Since Socrates we have had a long tradition of mathematical science and contract law driven by precision in mapping terms.
But we have also had many pronouncements by fools using labels - outside of poetry, beware the verbalistic, that archenemy of knowledge.
-
Different people rarely mean the same thing when they say "religion," nor do they realize it.
For early Jews and Muslims, religion was law.
Din means law in Hebrew and religion in Arabic.
For early Jews, religion was also tribal; for early Muslims, it was universal.
For the Romans, religion was social events, rituals, and festivals - the word religio was a counter to superstitio, and while present in the Roman zeitgeist it had no equivalent concept in the Greek-Byzantine East.
Throughout the ancient world, law was procedurally and mechanically its own thing.
Early Christianity, thanks to Saint Augustine, stayed relatively away from the law, and, later, remembering its origins, had an uneasy relation with it.
For instance, even during the Inquisition, a lay court formally handled final sentencing.
Further, Theodosius's code (compiled in the fifth century to unify Roman law) was "Christianized" with a short introduction, a blessing of sorts - the rest remained identical to pagan Roman legal reasoning as expounded in Constantinople and (mostly) Berytus.
The code remained dominated by the Phoenician legal scholars Ulpian and Papinian, who were pagan: contrary to theories by geopoliticalists, the Roman school of law of Berytus (Beirut) was not shut down by Christianity, but by an earthquake.
The difference is marked in that Christian Aramaic uses different words: din for religion and nomous (from the Greek) for law.
Jesus, with his imperative "give to Caesar what belongs to Caesar," separated the holy and the profane: Christianity was for another domain, "the kingdom to come," only merging with this one in the eschaton.
Neither Islam nor Judaism have a marked separation between holy and profane.
And of course Christianity moved away from the solely spiritual domain to embrace the ceremonial and ritualistic, integrating much of the pagan rites of the Levant and Asia Minor.
As an illustration of the symbolic separation between church and state, the title Pontifex Maximus (head priest), taken by the Roman emperors after Augustus, reverted after Theodosius, in the late fourth century, to the bishop of Rome, and later, more or less informally, to the Catholic Pope.
For most Jews today, religion has become ethnocultural, without the law - and for many, a nation.
Same for Armenians, Syriacs, Chaldeans, Copts, and Maronites.
For Orthodox and Catholic Christians, religion is largely aesthetics, pomp, and rituals.
For Protestants, religion is belief without aesthetics, pomp, or law.
Further East, for Buddhists, Shintoists, and Hindus, religion is practical and spiritual philosophy, with a code of ethics (and for some, a cosmogony).
So when Hindus talk about the Hindu "religion," it doesn't mean the same thing to a Pakistani, and would certainly mean something different to a Persian.
When the nation-state dream came about, things got more, much more complicated.
When an Arab used to say "Jew" he largely referred to a creed; to Arabs, a converted Jew was no longer a Jew.
But for a Jew, a Jew was simply defined as someone whose mother was a Jew.
But Judaism somewhat merged into nation-state and now, for many, indicates belonging to a nation.
In Serbia, Croatia, and Lebanon, religion means one thing at times of peace, and something quite different at times of war.
When someone discusses the "Christian minority" in the Levant, it doesn't amount to (as Arabs tend to think) promoting a Christian theocracy (full theocracies were rare in Christian history, just Byzantium and a short attempt by Calvin).
He just means "secular," or wants a marked separation of church and state.
Same for the gnostics (Druids, Druze, Mandeans, Alawis, Alevis) who have a religion largely unknown by its members, lest they leak and get persecuted by the dominant majority.
The problem with the European Union is that naive bureaucrats (those fellows who can't find a coconut on Coconut island) are fooled by the label.
They treat Salafism, say, as just a religion - with its houses of "worship" - when in fact it is just an intolerant political system, which promotes (or allows) violence and rejects the institutions of the West - those very institutions that allow them to operate.
We saw with the minority rule that the intolerant will run over the tolerant; cancer must be stopped before it becomes metastatic.
Salafism is very similar to atheistic Soviet Communism in its heyday: both have all-embracing control over all of human activity and thought, which makes discussions about whether religion or atheistic regimes are more murderous lacking in pertinence, precision, and realism.
BELIEF VS. BELIEF
We will see in the next chapter that "belief" can be epistemic, or simply procedural (or metaphorical) - leading to confusions about which sorts of beliefs are religious beliefs and which ones are not.
For, on top of the "religion" problem, there is a problem with belief.
Some beliefs are largely decorative, some are functional (they help in survival), others are literal.
And to revert to our metastatic Salafi problem: when one of these fundamentalists talks to a Christian, he is convinced that the Christian takes his own beliefs literally, while the Christian is convinced that the Salafi has the same oft-metaphorical concepts that he has, to be taken seriously but not literally - and, often, not very seriously.
Religions such as Christianity, Judaism, and, to some extent Shiite Islam, evolved (or, rather, let their members evolve in developing a sophisticated society) precisely by moving away from the literal.
The literal doesn't leave any room for adaptation.
As Gibbon wrote:
The various modes of worship, which prevailed in the Roman world, were all considered by the people, as equally true; by the philosopher, as equally false; and by the magistrate, as equally useful.
And thus toleration produced not only mutual indulgence, but even religious concord.
LIBERTARIANISM AND CHURCH-FREE RELIGIONS
As we mentioned, the Roman emperor Julian the Apostate tried to revert to ancient paganism after his father's cousin Constantine the Great started the process toward making Christianity a state religion almost half a century earlier.
But he made a fatal reasoning error.
His problem was that, having been brought up as a Christian, he imagined that paganism required a structure similar to that of the church, ce genre de trucs.
So he tried to create pagan bishops, synods, and these kinds of things.
He did not realize that each pagan group had its own definition of religion, that each temple had its own practices, that by definition paganism was distributed in its execution, rituals, cosmogonies, practices, and "beliefs."
Pagans did not have a category for paganism.
After Julian, a brilliant general and valiant warrior, died in battle (heroically), the dream of returning to ancient values ended with him.
Just as paganism cannot be pigeon-holed, the same applies to libertarianism.
It does not fit the structure of a political "party" - only that of a decentralized political movement.
The very concept doesn't allow for the straitjacket of a strong party line and unified policy with respect to, say, court locations or relations with Mongolia.
Political parties are hierarchical, they are designed in a way to substitute someone's own decision making with a well-defined protocol.
This doesn't work with libertarians.
The nomenklatura that is necessary in the functioning of a party cannot exist in a libertarian environment fraught with fractious and vehemently independent people.
Nevertheless, we libertarians share a minimal set of beliefs, the central one being to substitute the rule of law for the rule of authority.
Without necessarily realizing it, libertarians believe in complex systems.
And, since libertarianism is a movement, it can still exist as splintered factions within other political parties.
NEXT
To conclude, beware labels when it comes to matters associated with beliefs.
And avoid treating religions as if they are all the same animal.
But there is a commonality.
The next chapter will show us how religion does not like fair-weather friends; it wants commitment; it is based on skin in the game.
Chapter 16 No Worship Without Skin in the Game
Symmetry, symmetry everywhere - Belief requires an entry fee
It is when you break a fast that you understand religion.
I am writing this as I am ending the grueling Greek-Orthodox period of Lent, which, for the most part, allows no animal products.
This diet is particularly hard to keep in the West where people use butter and dairy products.
But once you fast, you feel entitled to celebrate Easter; it is like the exhilaration of fresh water when one is thirsty.
You've paid a price.
Recall our brief discussion of the theological necessity of making Christ man - he had to sacrifice himself.
Time to develop the argument here.
The main theological flaw in Pascal's wager is that belief cannot be a free option.
It entails a symmetry between what you pay and what you receive.
Things otherwise would be too easy.
So the skin-in-the-game rules that hold between humans also hold in our rapport with the gods.
THE GODS DO NOT LIKE CHEAP SIGNALING
I will always remember the church altar in Saint Sergius (or, in the vernacular, Mar Sarkis) in the Aramaic-speaking town of Maaloula, even if I live 125 years.
I visited the church a few decades ago, sparking an obsession with that ancient and neglected language.
The town still spoke at the time the version of Western Aramaic that was used by Christ.
At the time of Christ, the Levant spoke Greek in the coastal towns and Aramaic in the countryside.
For those into Talmud, Western Aramaic corresponds to "Yerushalmi" or "Palestinian Aramaic," as opposed to the Babylonian Aramaic closer to what is now Syriac.
It was mesmerizing to see children speak, tease each other, and do what children usually do, but in an ancient language.
When a town holds the remnants of an ancient language, one needs to look for vestiges of an ancient practice.
And indeed there was one.
The detail that I will always remember is that the altar in Saint Sergius has a drain for blood.
It had been recycled from an earlier pre-Christian practice.
The appurtenances of the church came from a reconverted pagan temple used by early Christians.
Actually, at the risk of upsetting a few people, it was not that reconverted: early Christians were sort of pagans.
The standard theory is that before the council of Nicea (fourth century), it was common for Christians to recycle pagan altars.
But there turns out to be evidence for what I always suspected: Christians and Jews in practice were not too differentiated from other Semitic cult followers, and shared places of worship with one another.
The presence of saints in Christianity comes from that mechanism of recycling.
There were no telephones, fax machines, or websites financed by Saudi princes to homogenize religions.
"Altar" in spoken Levantine and Aramaic is still maḋbaḣ from DBH, "ritual slaying by cutting the guttural vein."
It is an old tradition that left its mark on Islam: halal food requires such a method for slaughter.
And qorban, the Semitic word QRB for "getting closer (to God)," originally done via sacrifice, is still used as a word for sacrament.
In fact, one of the main figures of Shiite Islam, the Imam Hussein son of Ali, addressed God before his death by offering himself as sacrifice: "let me be the qorban for you" - the supreme offering.
And his followers, to this day, show literal skin in the game during the commemoration of his death, the day of Ashoura, engaging in self-flagellation that leads to open wounds.
Self-flagellation is also present in Christianity, as commemoration of the suffering of the Christ - while prevalent in the Middle Ages, it is now gone except in some places in Asia and Latin America.
In the Eastern Mediterranean pagan world (Greco-Semitic), no worship was done without sacrifice.
The gods did not accept cheap talk.
It was all about revealed preferences.
Also, burnt offerings were precisely burnt so no human would consume them.
Actually, not quite: the high priest got his share; priesthood was quite a lucrative position since in the pre-Christian, Greek-speaking Eastern Mediterranean, the offices of high priests were often auctioned off.
Physical sacrifice even applied to the Temple of Jerusalem.
And even to later Jews, or early Christians, the followers of Pauline Christianity.
Hebrews 9:22: Et omnia paene in sanguine mundantur secundum legem et sine sanguinis fusione non fit remissio.
"And almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission."
But Christianity ended up removing the idea of such sacrifice under the notion that Christ sacrificed himself for others.
But if you visit a Catholic or Orthodox church on Sunday service, you will see a simulacrum.
It has wine representing blood, which, at the close of the ceremony is flushed in the piscina (the drain).
Exactly as in the Maaloula altar.
Christianity used the personality of the Christ for the simulacrum; he sacrificed himself for us.
At the Last Supper, on the night when He was betrayed, our Savior instituted the Eucharistic sacrifice of His Body and Blood.
He did this in order to perpetuate the sacrifice of the Cross throughout the centuries until He should come again.
- Sacrosanctum Concilium, 47
Sacrifice was ended by making it metaphorical:
I appeal to you therefore brothers, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which is your spiritual worship.
- Romans 12:1
As for Judaism, the same progression took place: after the destruction of the Second Temple in the first century A.D., animal sacrifices ended.
Before that, the parable of Isaac and Abraham marks the notion of progressive departure from human sacrifice by the Abrahamic sects - as well as an insistence of skin in the game.
But actual animal sacrifice continued for a while - though under different terms.
God tested Abraham's faith with an asymmetric gift: sacrifice your son for me - it was not as with other situations of just giving the gods part of your yield in return for future benefits and improved harvests, as with common gift-giving, with tacit reciprocal expectations.
It was the mother of all unconditional gifts to God.
It was not a transaction, the transaction to end all transactions.
About a millennia later, Christians had their last transaction.
The philosopher Moshe Halbertal holds that, post the simulacrum of Isaac, dealings with the Lord became a reciprocal gift-giving affair.
But why did animal sacrifice continue for a while?
Canaanite habits die hard.
Maimonides explains why God did not proscribe immediately the then-common practice of animal sacrifice: the reason is that "to obey such a commandment would have been contrary to the nature of man, who generally cleaves to that to which he is used"; instead he "transferred to His service that which had served as a worship of created beings and of things imaginary and unreal."
So animal sacrifice continued - largely voluntary - but, and this is the mark of Abrahamic religion, not the worship of animals, or the propitiation of deities through bribery.
The latter practice even extended to the bribery of other tribes and others' gods, as continued to be practiced in Arabia until the sixth century.
Then a United Nations of sorts, a communal marketplace for both goods, foreign relations, and various bilateral worship, took place in Mecca.
Love without sacrifice is theft (Procrustes).
This applies to any form of love, particularly the love of God.
THE EVIDENCE
To summarize, in a Judeo-Christian place of worship, the focal point, where the priest stands, symbolizes skin in the game.
The notion of belief without sacrifice, which is tangible proof, is new in history.
The strength of a creed did not rest on "evidence" of the powers of its gods, but evidence of the skin in the game on the part of its worshippers.
Chapter 17 Is the Pope Atheist?
It is dangerous to be a Pope, but you get good medical attention - Talk is just talk - Religion manages rituals
After Pope John Paul II was shot in 1981, he was rushed to the emergency room of the Agostino Gemelli University Polyclinic, where he met a collection of some of the most skilled doctors - modern doctors - Italy could produce, in contrast with the neighboring public hospital with lower-quality care.
The Gemelli clinic later became the preferred destination for the pontiff at the first sign of a health problem.
At no point during the emergency period did the drivers of the ambulance consider taking John Paul the Second to a chapel for a prayer, or some equivalent form of intercession with the Lord, to give the sacred first right of refusal for the treatment.
And not one of his successors seemed to have considered giving precedence to dealing with the Lord with the hope of some miraculous intervention in place of the trappings of modern medicine.
This is not to say that the bishops, cardinals, priests, and mere laypeople didn't pray and ask the Lord for help, nor that they believed that prayers weren't subsequently answered, given the remarkable recovery of the saintly man.
But it remains that nobody in the Vatican seems to ever take chances by going first to the Lord, subsequently to the doctor, and, what is even more surprising, nobody seems to see a conflict with such inversion of the logical sequence.
In fact the opposite course of action would have been considered madness.
It would be in opposition to the tenets of the Catholic church, as it would be considered voluntary death, which is banned.
Note that the putative predecessors of the pope, the various Roman emperors, had a similar policy of seeking treatment first, and having recourse to theology after, although some of their treatments were packaged as delivered by the deities, such as the Greek god Asclepius or the weaker Roman equivalent Vediovis.
Now try to imagine a powerful head of an "atheist" sect, equivalent to the pope in rank, suffering a similar health exigency.
He would have arrived at Gemelli (not some second-rate hospital in Latium) at the same time as John Paul.
He would have had a similar-looking crowd of "atheist" well-wishers come to give him something called "hope" (or "wishes" for a good recovery) in their very atheistic language, with some self-consistent narrative about what they would like or "wish" to happen to their prominent man.
The atheists would have been less colorfully dressed; their vocabulary would have been a bit less ornamental as well, but their actions would have been nearly identical.
Clearly, there are a lot of differences between the Most Holy Father and an atheist of equivalent rank, but these concern matters that are not life-threatening.
These include sacrifices.
His Holiness has given up on certain activities in the bedroom, other than reading and praying, though at least a dozen of his predecessors, the most famous one being Alexander VI, fathered a great deal of children, at least one when he was in his sixties, and by the conventional (not the immaculate) route.
(There have been so many playboy popes that people are bored with their stories.)
His Holiness spends considerable time praying, organizing every minute of his life according to certain Christian practices.
And yet, while they devote less of their time to what they believe is not "religion," many atheists engage in yoga and similar collective activities, or sit in concert halls in awe and silence (you can't even smoke a cigar or shout buy orders on your cell phone), spending considerable time doing what to a Martian would look like similar ritualistic gestures.
There was a period, the Albigensian crusade, in the thirteenth century, during which Catholics engaged in the mass killing of heretics.
Some slaughtered indiscriminately, heretics and nonheretics, as a time saver and complexity-reduction approach.
To them, it did not matter who was who, since "The Lord would be able to tell them apart."
Those times are long gone.
Most Christians, when it comes to central medical, ethical, and decision-making situations (like myself, an Orthodox Christian) do not act any differently than atheists.
Those who do (such as Christian scientists) are few.
Most Christians have accepted the modern trappings of democracy, oligarchy, or military dictatorship, all these heathen political regimes, rather than seeking theocracies.
Their decisions on central matters are indistinguishable from those of an atheist.
RELIGIOUS IN WORDS
So we define atheism or secularism in deeds, by the distance between one's actions and those of a nonatheistic person for an equivalent situation, not his beliefs and other decorative and symbolic matters - which, we will show in the next chapter, do not count.
Let us take stock here.
There are people who are
atheists in actions, religious in words (most Orthodox and Catholic Christians)
and others who are
religious in actions, religious in words (Salafi Islamists and suicide bombers)
but I know of nobody who is atheist in both actions and words, completely devoid of rituals, respect for the dead, and superstitions (say a belief in economics, or in the miraculous powers of the mighty state and its institutions).
NEXT
This chapter will ease us to the next section: a) rationality resides in what you do, not in what you think or in what you "believe" (skin in the game), and b) rationality is about survival.
