Book 6 Deeper into Agency
Chapter 9 Surgeons Should Not Look Like Surgeons
Literature doesn't look like literature - Donaldo hiring practitioners - The glory of bureaucracy - Teach a professor how to deadlift - Looking the part
LOOKING THE PART
Say you had the choice between two surgeons of similar rank in the same department in some hospital.
The first is highly refined in appearance; he wears silver-rimmed glasses, has a thin build, delicate hands, measured speech, and elegant gestures.
His hair is silver and well combed.
He is the person you would put in a movie if you needed to impersonate a surgeon.
His office prominently boasts Ivy League diplomas, both for his undergraduate and medical schools.
The second one looks like a butcher; he is overweight, with large hands, uncouth speech, and an unkempt appearance.
His shirt is dangling from the back.
No known tailor on the East Coast of the U.S. is capable of making his shirt button at the neck.
He speaks unapologetically with a strong New Yawk accent, as if he wasn't aware of it.
He even has a gold tooth showing when he opens his mouth.
The absence of diplomas on the wall hints at the lack of pride in his education: he perhaps went to some local college.
In a movie, you would expect him to impersonate a retired bodyguard for a junior congressman, or a third-generation cook in a New Jersey cafeteria.
Now if I had to pick, I would overcome my sucker-proneness and take the butcher any minute.
Even more: I would seek the butcher as a third option if my choice was between two doctors who looked like doctors.
Why?
Simply the one who doesn't look the part, conditional on having made a (sort of) successful career in his profession, had to have much to overcome in terms of perception.
And if we are lucky enough to have people who do not look the part, it is thanks to the presence of some skin in the game, the contact with reality that filters out incompetence, as reality is blind to looks.
When results come from dealing directly with reality rather than through the agency of commentators, image matters less, even if it correlates to skills.
But image matters quite a bit when there is hierarchy and standardized "job evaluation."
Consider the chief executive officers of corporations: they don't just look the part, they even look the same.
And, worse, when you listen to them talk, they sound the same, down to the same vocabulary and metaphors.
But that's their job: as I will keep reminding the reader, counter to the common belief, executives are different from entrepreneurs and are supposed to look like actors.
Now there may be some correlation between looks and skills (someone who looks athletic is likely to be athletic), but, conditional on having had some success in spite of not looking the part, it is potent, even crucial, information.
So it becomes no wonder that the job of chief executive of the country was once filled by a former actor, Ronald Reagan.
Actually, the best actor is the one nobody realizes is an actor: a closer look at Barack Obama shows that he was even more of an actor: a fancy Ivy League education combined with a liberal reputation is compelling as an image builder.
Much has been written about the millionaire next door: the person who is actually rich, on balance, but doesn't look like the person you would expect to be rich, and vice versa.
About every private banker is taught to not be fooled by the looks of the client and avoid chasing Ferrari owners at country clubs.
As I am writing these lines, a neighbor in my ancestral village (and like almost everyone there, a remote relative), who led a modest but comfortable life, ate food he grew by himself, drank his own pastis (arak), that sort of thing, left an estate of a hundred million dollars, a hundred times what one would have expected him to leave.
So the next time you randomly pick a novel, avoid the one with the author photo representing a pensive man with an ascot standing in front of wall-to-wall bookshelves.
By the same reasoning, and flipping the arguments, skilled thieves at large should not look like thieves.
Those who do are more likely to be in jail.
Next, we will get deeper into the following:
In any type of activity or business divorced from the direct filter of skin in the game, the great majority of people know the jargon, play the part, and are intimate with the cosmetic details, but are clueless about the subject.
THE GREEN LUMBER FALLACY
The idea of this chapter is Lindy-compatible.
Don't think that beautiful apples taste better, goes the Latin saying.
This is a subtler version of the common phrase "all that glitters is not gold" - something it has taken consumers half a century to figure out; even then, as they have been continuously fooled by the aesthetics of produce.
An expert rule in my business is to never hire a well-dressed trader.
But it goes beyond:
Hire the successful trader, conditional on a solid track record, whose details you can understand the least.
Not the most: the least.
Why so?
I've introduced this point in Antifragile, where I called it the green lumber fallacy.
A fellow made a fortune in green lumber without knowing what appears to be essential details about the product he traded - he wasn't aware that green lumber stood for freshly cut wood, not lumber that was painted green.
Meanwhile, by contrast, the person who related the story went bankrupt while knowing every intimate detail about the green lumber.
The fallacy is that what one may need to know in the real world does not necessarily match what one can perceive through intellect: it doesn't mean that details are not relevant, only that those we tend (IYI-style) to believe are important can distract us from more central attributes of the price mechanism.
In any activity, hidden details are only revealed via Lindy.
Another aspect:
What can be phrased and expressed in a clear narrative that convinces suckers will be a sucker trap.
My friend Terry B., who taught an investment class, invited two speakers.
One looked the part of the investment manager, down to a tee: tailored clothes, expensive watch, shiny shoes, and clarity of exposition.
He also talked big, projecting the type of confidence you would desire in an executive.
The second looked closer to our butcher-surgeon and was totally incomprehensible; he even gave the impression that he was confused.
Now, when Terry asked the students which of the two they believed was more successful, they didn't even get close.
The first, not unexpectedly, was in the equivalent of the soup kitchen of that business; the second was at least a centimillionaire.
The late Jimmy Powers, a die-hard New York Irishman with whom I worked in an investment bank early in my trading career, was successful in spite of being a college dropout, with the background of a minor Brooklyn street gangster.
He would discuss our trading activities in meetings with such sentences as: "We did this and then did that, badaboom, badabing, and then it was all groovy," to an audience of extremely befuddled executives who didn't mind not understanding what he was talking about, so long as our department was profitable.
Remarkably, after a while, I learned to effortlessly understand what Jimmy meant.
I also learned, in my early twenties, that the people you understand most easily were necessarily the bull***tters.
BEST-DRESSED BUSINESS PLAN
Literature should not look like literature.
The author Georges Simenon worked as a teenager in journalism as an assistant to the famous French writer Colette; she taught him to resist the idea of putting imperfect subjunctives and references to zephyrs, rhododendrons, and firmaments in his text - the kind of stuff one does when waxing literary.
Simenon took this advice to the extreme: his style is similar to that of, say, Graham Greene; it is stripped to the core, and as a result, words do not stand in the way of conveying atmosphere - you feel wetness penetrating your shoes just reading his accounts of commissar Maigret spending endless hours in the Parisian rain; it is as if his central character is the background.
Likewise, the illusion prevails that businesses work via business plans and science via funding.
This is strictly not true: a business plan is a useful narrative for those who want to convince a sucker.
It works because, as I said in Prologue 2, firms in the entrepreneurship business make most of their money packaging companies and selling them; it is not easy to sell without some strong narrative.
But for a real business (as opposed to a fund-raising scheme), something that should survive on its own, business plans and funding work backward.
At the time of writing, most big recent successes (Microsoft, Apple, Facebook, Google) were started by people with skin and soul in the game and grew organically - if they had recourse to funding, it was to expand or allow the managers to cash out; funding was not the prime source of creation.
You don't create a firm by creating a firm; nor do you do science by doing science.
A BISHOP FOR HALLOWEEN
Which brings me back to social science.
I have in many instances quickly jotted down ideas on a piece of paper, along with mathematical proofs, and posted them somewhere, planning to get them published.
No fluff or the ideas-free verbose circularity of social science papers.
In some fake fields like economics, ritualistic and dominated by citation rings, I discovered that everything is in the presentation.
So the criticism I've received has never been about the content, but rather the looks.
There is a certain language one needs to learn through a long investment, and papers are just iterations around that language.
Never hire an academic unless his function is to partake of the rituals of writing papers or taking exams.
Which brings us to the attributes of scientism.
For it is not just some presentation that matters to these idiots.
It is unnecessary complication.
But there is a logic behind these academic complications and rituals.
Did you ever wonder why a bishop is dressed for Halloween?
Mediterranean societies are traditionally ones in which the highest-ranking person is the one with the most skin in the game.
And if anything characterizes today's America, it is economic risk taking, thanks to a happy transfer of martial values to business and commerce in Anglo-Saxon society - remarkably, traditional Arabic culture also puts the same emphasis on the honor of economic risk-taking.
But history shows that there were - and still are - societies in which the intellectual was at the top.
The Hindus held the Brahman to be first in the hierarchy, the Celts had the druids (so do their Druze possible-cousins), the Egyptians had their scribes, and the Chinese had for a relatively brief time the scholar.
Let me add postwar France.
You can notice a remarkable similarity to the way these intellectuals held power and separated themselves from the rest: through complex, extremely elaborate rituals, mysteries that stay within the caste, and an overriding focus on the cosmetic.
Even within the "normal" warrior-run or doer-run societies, the class of intellectuals is all about rituals: without pomp and ceremony, the intellectual is just a talker, that is, pretty much nothing.
Consider the bishop in my parts, the Greek-Orthodox church: it's a show of dignity.
A bishop on rollerblades would no longer be a bishop.
There is nothing wrong with the decorative if it remains what it is, decorative, as remains true today.
However, science and business must not be decorative.
-
Next, we examine the following points:
Just as the slick fellow in a Ferrari looks richer than the rumpled centimillionaire, scientism looks more scientific than real science.
True intellect should not appear to be intellectual.
THE GORDIAN KNOT
Never pay for complexity of presentation when all you need is results.
Alexander the Magnus was once called to solve the following challenge in the Phrygian city of Gordium (as usual with Greek stories, in modern-day Turkey).
When he entered Gordium, he found an old wagon, its yoke tied with a multitude of knots, all so tightly entangled that it was impossible to figure out how they were fastened.
An oracle had declared that he who would untie the knot would rule all of what was then called "Asia," that is, Asia Minor, the Levant, and the Middle East.
After wrestling with the knot, the Magnus drew back from the lump of gnarled ropes, then made a proclamation that it didn't matter for the prophecy how the tangle was to be unraveled.
He then drew his sword and, with a single stroke, cut the knot in half.
No "successful" academic could ever afford to follow such a policy.
And no Intellectual Yet Idiot.
It took medicine a long time to realize that when a patient shows up with a headache, it is much better to give him aspirin or recommend a good night's sleep than do brain surgery, although the latter appears to be more "scientific."
But most "consultants" and others paid by the hour are not there yet.
OVERINTELLECTUALIZATION OF LIFE
The researchers Gerd Gigerenzer and Henry Brighton contrast the approaches of the "rationalistic" school (in quotation marks, as there is little that is rational in these rationalists) and that of the heuristic one, in the following example on how a baseball player catches the ball by Richard Dawkins:
Richard Dawkins (…) argues that "He behaves as if he had solved a set of differential equations in predicting the trajectory of the ball.
At some subconscious level, something functionally equivalent to the mathematical calculations is going on."
(…) Instead, experiments have shown that players rely on several heuristics.
The gaze heuristic is the simplest one and works if the ball is already high up in the air: Fix your gaze on the ball, start running, and adjust your running speed so that the angle of gaze remains constant.
This error by the science writer Richard Dawkins generalizes to, simply, overintellectualizing humans in their responses to all manner of natural phenomena, rather than accepting the role of a collection of mental heuristics used for specific purposes.
The baseball player has no clue about the exact heuristic, but he goes with it - otherwise he would lose the game to another, nonintellectualizing, competitor.
Likewise, as we will see in Chapter 18, religious "beliefs" are simply mental heuristics that solve a collection of problems - without the agent really knowing how.
Solving equations in order to make a decision isn't a skill we humans can aspire to have - it is computationally impossible.
What we can rationally do is neutralize some harmful aspects of these heuristics, defang them so to speak.
ANOTHER BUSINESS OF INTERVENTION
People who have always operated without skin in the game (or without their skin in the right game) seek the complicated and centralized, and avoid the simple like the plague.
Practitioners, on the other hand, have opposite instincts, looking for the simplest heuristics.
Some rules:
People who are bred, selected, and compensated to find complicated solutions do not have an incentive to implement simplified ones.
And it gets more complicated as the remedy has itself a skin-in-the-game problem.
This is particularly acute in the meta-problem, when the solution is about solving this very problem.
In other words, many problems in society come from the interventions of people who sell complicated solutions because that's what their position and training invite them to do.
There is absolutely no gain for someone in such a position to propose something simple: you are rewarded for perception, not results.
Meanwhile, they pay no price for the side effects that grow nonlinearly with such complications.
This also holds true when it comes to solutions that are profitable to technologists.
GOLD AND RICE
Now, indeed, we know by instinct that brain surgery is not more "scientific" than aspirin, any more than flying the forty or so miles between JFK and Newark airports represent "efficiency," although there is more technology involved.
But we don't easily translate this to other domains and remain victims of scientism, which is to science what a Ponzi scheme is to investment, or what advertisement or propaganda are to genuine scientific communication.
You magnify the cosmetic attributes.
Recall the genetic modifications of Book 3 (and the smear campaign of Chapter 4).
Let us consider the story of the genetically modified Golden Rice.
There has been a problem of malnutrition and nutrient deficiency in many developing countries, which my collaborators Yaneer Bar-Yam and Joe Norman attribute to a simple and very straightforward transportation issue.
Simply, we waste more than a third of our food supply, and the gains from simple improvement in distribution would far outweigh those from modification of supply.
Simply consider that close to 80 or 85 percent of the cost of a tomato can be attributed to transportation, storage, and waste (unsold inventories), rather than the cost at the farmer level.
So visibly our efforts should be on low-tech distribution.
Now the "techies" saw an angle of intervention.
First, you show pictures of starving children to elicit sympathy and prevent further discussion - anyone who argues in the presence of dying children is a heartless a**hole.
Second, you make it look like any critic of your method is arguing against saving the children.
Third, you propose some scientific-looking technique that is lucrative to you and, should it cause a catastrophe or blight, insulates you from the long-term effects.
Fourth, you enlist journalists and useful idiots, people who hate things that appear "unscientific" in their unscientific eyes.
Fifth, you create a smear campaign to harm the reputations of researchers who, not having f*** you money, are very vulnerable to the slightest blemish to their reputations.
The technique in question consists in genetically modifying rice to have the grains include vitamins.
My colleagues and I made an effort to show the following, which is a criticism of the method in general.
First, transgenics, that is the type of genetic modifications thus obtained, was not analytically in the same category as the crossbreeding of plants and animals that have characterized human activities since husbandry - say, potatoes or mandarin oranges.
We skipped complexity classes, and the effects on the environment are not foreseeable - nobody studied the interactions.
Recall that fragility is in the dosage: falling from the 20th floor is not in the same risk category as falling from your chair.
We even showed that there was a patent increase in systemic risk.
Second, there was no proper risk study, and the statistical methods in the papers in support of the argument were flawed.
Third, we invoked the principle of simplicity, which was called antiscience.
Why don't we give these people rice and vitamins separately?
After all, we don't have genetically modified coffee that has milk with it.
Fourth, we were able to show that GMOs brought a bevy of hidden risk to the environment, because of the higher use of pesticide, which kills the microbiome (that is, the bacteria and other life in the soil).
I realized soon after that, owing to the minority rule, there was no point continuing.
As I said in Book 3, GMOs lost simply because a minority of intelligent and intransigent people stood against them.
THE COMPENSATION
Simply, the minute one is judged by others rather than by reality, things become warped as follows.
Firms that haven't gone bankrupt yet have something called personnel departments.
So there are metrics used and "evaluation forms" to fill.
The minute one has evaluation forms, distortions occur.
Recall that in The Black Swan I had to fill my evaluation form asking for the percentage of profitable days, encouraging traders to make steady money at the expense of hidden risks of Black Swans, consequential losses.
Russian Roulette allows you to make money five times out of six.
This has bankrupted banks, as banks lose less than one in one hundred quarters, but then they lose more than they ever made.
My declared approach was to try to make money infrequently.
I tore the evaluation form in front of the big boss and they left me alone.
Now the mere fact that an evaluation causes you to be judged not by the end results, but by some intermediary metric that invites you to look sophisticated, brings some distortions.
EDUCATION AS LUXURY GOOD
Ivy League universities are becoming in the eyes of the new Asian upper class the ultimate status luxury good.
Harvard is like a Vuitton bag and a Cartier watch.
It is a huge drag on the middle class, who have been plowing an increased share of their savings into educational institutions, transferring their money to bureaucrats, real estate developers, tenured professors of some discipline that would not otherwise exist (gender studies, comparative literature, or international economics), and other parasites.
In the United States, we have a buildup of student loans that automatically transfer to these rent extractors.
In a way it is no different from racketeering: one needs a decent university "name" to get ahead in life.
But we have evidence that collectively society doesn't advance with organized education, rather the reverse: the level of (formal) education in a country is the result of wealth.
A BS DETECTION HEURISTIC
The heuristic here would be to use education in reverse: hire, conditional on an equal set of skills, the person with the least label-oriented education.
It means that the person had to succeed in spite of the credentialization of his competitors and overcome more serious hurdles.
In addition, people who didn't go to Harvard are easier to deal with in real life.
You can tell if a discipline is BS if the degree depends severely on the prestige of the school granting it.
I remember when I applied to MBA programs being told that anything outside the top ten or twenty would be a waste of time.
On the other hand a degree in mathematics is much less dependent on the school (conditional on being above a certain level, so the heuristic would apply to the difference between top ten and top two thousand schools).
The same applies to research papers.
In math and physics, a result posted on the repository site arXiv (with a minimum hurdle) is fine.
In low-quality fields like academic finance (where papers are usually some form of complicated storytelling), the "prestige" of the journal is the sole criterion.
REAL GYMS DON'T LOOK LIKE GYMS
This education labeling provides a lot of cosmetic things but misses something essential about antifragility and true learning, reminiscent of gyms.
People are impressed with expensive equipment - fancy, complicated, multicolored - meant to look as if it belonged on a spaceship.
Things appear maximally sophisticated and scientific - but remember that what looks scientific is usually scientism, not science.
As with label universities, you pay quite a bit of money to join, largely for the benefit of the real estate developer.
Yet people into strength training (those who are actually strong across many facets of real life) know that users of these machines gain no strength beyond an initial phase.
By having recourse to complicated equipment that typically targets very few muscles, regular users will eventually be pear-shaping and growing weaker over time, with skills that do not transfer outside of the very machine that they trained on.
The equipment may have some use in a hospital or a rehabilitation program, but that's about it.
On the other hand, the simpler barbell (a metal bar with two weights on both ends) is the only standard piece of equipment that gets you to recruit your entire body for exercises - and it is the simplest and cheapest to get.
All you need to learn are the safety skills to move off the floor at your maximum while avoiding injury.
Lindy again: weight lifters have known the phenomenology for at least two and a half millennia.
All you need are shoes to run outside when you can (and perhaps some pants that don't make you look ridiculous), and a barbell with weights.
As I am writing these lines I am checking the brochure of a fancy hotel where I will be spending the next two days.
The brochure was put together by some MBA: it is glossy, shows all the machines and the jars of the color-rich juices to "improve" your health.
They even have a swimming pool; but no barbell.
And if gyms should not look like gyms, exercise should not look like exercise.
Most gains in physical strength come from working the tails of the distribution, close to your limit.
NEXT
This chapter managed to mix weight lifting and fundamental research under the single argument that, while the presence of skin in the game does away with the cosmetic, its absence causes multiplicative nonsense.
Next, let us consider the divergence of interest between you and yourself when you become rich.
Chapter 10 Only the Rich Are Poisoned: The Preferences of Others
The salesman is the boss - How to drink poison - Advertising and manipulation - The unbearable silence of large mansions on Sunday evening
When people get rich, they shed their skin-in-the-game-driven experiential mechanism.
They lose control of their preferences, substituting constructed preferences for their own, complicating their lives unnecessarily, triggering their own misery.
And these constructed preferences are of course the preferences of those who want to sell them something.
This is a skin-in-the-game problem, as the choices of the rich are dictated by others who have something to gain, and no side effects, from the sale.
And given that they are rich, and their exploiters not often so, nobody would shout victim.
I once had dinner in a Michelin-starred restaurant with a fellow who insisted on eating there instead of my selection of a casual Greek taverna with a friendly owner-operator whose second cousin was the manager and third cousin once removed was the friendly receptionist.
The other customers seemed, as we say in Mediterranean languages, to have a cork plugged in their behind obstructing proper ventilation, causing the vapors to build on the inside of the gastrointestinal walls, leading to the irritable type of decorum you only notice in the educated semi-upper classes.
I noted that, in addition to the plugged corks, all the men wore ties.
Dinner consisted of a succession of complicated small things, with microscopic ingredients and contrasting tastes that forced you to concentrate as if you were taking some entrance exam.
You were not eating, rather visiting some type of museum with an affected English major lecturing you on some artistic dimension you would have never considered on your own.
There was so little that was familiar and so little that fit my taste buds: once something on the occasion tasted like something real, there was no chance to have more as we moved on to the next dish.
Trudging through the dishes and listening to some bull***t by the sommelier about the paired wine, I was afraid of losing concentration.
It costs a lot of energy to fake that you're not bored.
In fact, I discovered an optimization in the wrong place: the only thing I cared about, the bread, was not warm.
It appears that this is not a Michelin requirement for three stars.
VENENUM IN AURO BIBITUR
I left the place starving.
Now, if I had a choice, I would have had some time-tested recipe (say a pizza with very fresh ingredients, or a juicy hamburger) in a lively place - for a twentieth of the price.
But because the dinner partner could afford the expensive restaurant, we ended up the victims of some complicated experiments by a chef judged by some Michelin bureaucrat.
It would fail the Lindy effect: food does better through minute variations from Sicilian grandmother to Sicilian grandmother.
It hit me that the rich were natural targets; as the eponymous Thyestes shouts in Seneca's tragedy, thieves do not enter impecunious homes, and one is more likely to be drinking poison in a golden cup than an ordinary one.
Poison is drunk in golden cups (Venenum in auro bibitur).
It is easy to scam people by getting them into complications - the poor are spared that type of scamming.
This is the same complication we saw in Chapter 9 that makes academics sell the most possibly complicated solution when a simple one can do.
Further, the rich start using "experts" and "consultants."
An entire industry meant to swindle you will swindle you: financial consultants, diet advisors, exercise experts, lifestyle engineers, sleeping councilors, breathing specialists, etc.
Hamburgers, to many of us, are vastly tastier than filet mignon because of the higher fat content, but people have been convinced that the latter is better because it is more expensive to produce.
My idea of the good life is to not attend a gala dinner, one of those situations where you find yourself stuck seated for two hours between the wife of a Kansas City real estate developer (who just visited Nepal) and a Washington lobbyist (who just returned from a vacation in Bali).
LARGE FUNERAL HOMES
Same with real estate: most people, I am convinced, are happier in close quarters, in a real barrio-style neighborhood, where they can feel human warmth and company.
But when they have big bucks they end up pressured to move into outsized, impersonal, and silent mansions, far away from neighbors.
On late afternoons, the silence of these large galleries has a funereal feel to it, but without the soothing music.
This is something historically rare: in the past, large mansions were teeming with servants, head-servants, butlers, cooks, assistants, maids, private tutors, impoverished cousins, horse grooms, even personal musicians.
And nobody today will come to console you for having a mansion - few will realize that it is quite sad to be there on Sunday evening.
As Vauvenargues, the French moralist, figured out, small is preferable owing to what we would call in today's terms scale properties.
Some things can be, simply, too large for your heart.
Rome, he wrote, was easy to love by its denizens when it was a small village, harder when it became a large empire.
Prosperous people of the type who don't look rich are certainly aware of the point - they live in comfortable quarters and instinctively know that a move will be a mental burden.
Many still live in their original houses.
Very few people understand their own choices, and end up being manipulated by those who want to sell them something.
In that sense, impoverishment might even be desirable.
Looking at Saudi Arabia, which should progressively revert to the pre-oil level of poverty, I wonder if taking away some things from them - including the swarm of fawning foreigners coming to skin them - will make them better off.
To put it another way: if wealth is giving you fewer options instead of more (and more varied) options, you're doing it wrong.
CONVERSATION
If anything, being rich you need to hide your money if you want to have what I call friends.
This may be known; what is less obvious is that you may also need to hide your erudition and learning.
People can only be social friends if they don't try to upstage or outsmart one another.
Indeed, the classical art of conversation is to avoid any imbalance, as in Baldassare Castiglione's Book of the Courtier: people need to be equal, at least for the purpose of the conversation, otherwise it fails.
It has to be hierarchy-free and equal in contribution.
You'd rather have dinner with your friends than with your professor, unless of course your professor understands "the art" of conversation.
Indeed, one can generalize and define a community as a space within which many rules of competition and hierarchy are lifted, where the collective prevails over one's interest.
Of course there will be tension with the outside, but that's another discussion.
This idea of competition being lifted within a group or a tribe was, once again, present in the notion of a group as studied by Elinor Ostrom.
NONLINEARITY OF PROGRESS
Now let us generalize to progress in general.
Do you want society to get wealthy, or is there something else you prefer - avoidance of poverty?
Are your choices yours or those of salespeople?
Let's return to the restaurant experience and discuss constructed preferences as compared to natural ones.
If I had a choice between paying $200 for a pizza or $6.95 for the French complicated experience, I would readily pay $200 for the pizza, plus $9.95 for a bottle of Malbec wine.
Actually I would pay to not have the Michelin experience.
This reasoning shows that sophistication can, at some level, cause degradation, what economists call "negative utility."
This tells us something about wealth and the growth of gross domestic product in society; it shows the presence of an inverted U curve with a level beyond which you get incremental harm.
It is detectable only if you get rid of constructed preferences.
Now, many societies have been getting wealthier and wealthier, many beyond the positive part of the inverted U curve, not counting the effect of the increased comfort on their spoiled children.
And I am certain that if pizza were priced at $200, the people with corks plugged in their behinds would be lining up for it.
But it is too easy to produce, so they opt for the costly, and pizza with fresh natural ingredients will be always cheaper than the complicated crap.
So long as society is getting richer, someone will try to sell you something until the point of degradation of your well-being, and a bit beyond that.
NEXT
The next chapter will present the rule of no verbal threat through the history of the experts of the craft, the sect of the Assassins.
Chapter 11 Facta non Verba (Deeds Before Words)
Dead horse in your bed - Friendship via poisoned cake - Roman emperors and U.S. presidents - A living enemy is worth ten dead ones
The best enemy is the one you own by putting skin in his game and letting him know the exact rules that come with it.
You keep him alive, with the knowledge that he owes his life to your benevolence.
The notion that an enemy you own is better than a dead one was perfected by the order of the Assassins, so we will do some digging into the work of that secret society.
AN OFFER VERY HARD TO REFUSE
There is this formidable scene in the Godfather when a Hollywood executive wakes up with the bloody severed head of his cherished race horse in his bed.
He had refused to hire a Sicilian-American actor for reasons that appeared iniquitous, as while he knew the latter was the best for the role, he was resentful of the "olive oil voice" that had charmed one of his past mistresses and fearful of its powers to seduce future ones.
It turned out that the actor, who in real life was (possibly) Frank Sinatra, had friends and friends of friends, that type of thing; he was even the godson of a capo.
A visit from the consigliere of the "family" neither succeeded to sway the executive, nor softened his Hollywood abrasiveness - the fellow failed to realize that by flying across the country to make the request, the high-ranking mobster was not just providing the type of recommendation letter you mail to the personnel department of a state university.
He had made him an offer that he could not refuse (the expression was popularized by that scene in the movie).
It was a threat, and not an empty threat.
As I am writing these lines, people discuss terrorism and terrorist groups while making severe category mistakes; there are in fact two totally distinct varieties.
The first group are terrorists for about everyone, that is, for every person equipped with the ability to discern and isn't a resident of Saudi Arabia and doesn't work for a think tank funded by sheikhs; the second are militia groups largely called terrorists by their enemies, and "resistance" or "freedom fighters" by those who don't dislike them.
The first includes nonsoldiers who indiscriminately kill civilians for effect and don't bother with military targets, as their aim isn't to make military gains, just to make a statement, harm some living humans, produce some noise, and, for some, find a low-error way to go to paradise.
Most Sunni jihadis, of the type who take incommensurable pleasure in blowing up civilians, such as Al Qaeda, ISIS, and the "moderate rebels" in Syria sponsored by former U.S. president Obama, are in that category.
The second group is about strategic political assassination - the Irish Republican Army, most Shiite organizations, Algerian independence fighters against France, French resistance fighters during the German occupation, etc.
For Shiites and similar varieties in the Near and Middle East, the ancestry, methods, and rules originate in the order of the Assassins, itself following the modus of the Judean Sicarii during Roman times.
The Sicarii are named after the daggers they used to kill Roman soldiers and, mostly, their Judean collaborators, due to what they perceived as the profanation of their temple and the land.
I have the misfortune to know a bit about the subject.
My high school, the Franco-Lebanese Lycée of Beirut, has a list of "notable" former students.
I am the only one who is "notable" for reasons other than being the victim of a successful or attempted assassination (although I have enough Salafi enemies and there is still time to satisfy such requirement - skin in the game).
THE ASSASSINS
The most interesting thing about the Assassins is that actual assassination was low on their agenda.
They understood non-cheap messaging.
They preferred to own their enemies.
And the only enemy you cannot manipulate is a dead one.
In 1118, Ahmad Sanjar became the sultan of the Seljuk Turkish Empire of Asia minor (that is, modern-day Turkey), Iran, and parts of Afghanistan.
Soon after his accession, he woke up one day with a dagger next to his bed, firmly planted in the ground.
In one version of the legend, a letter informed him that the dagger thrust in hard ground was preferable to the alternative, being plunged in his soft breast.
It was a characteristic message of the Hashishins, aka Assassins, making him aware of the need to leave them alone, send them birthday gifts, or hire their actors for his next movie.
Sultan Sanjar had previously snubbed their peace negotiators, so they moved to phase two of a demonstrably well planned-out process.
They convinced him that his life was in their hands and that, crucially, he didn't have to worry if he did the right thing.
Indeed Sanjar and the Assassins had a happy life together ever after.
You will note that no explicit verbal threat was issued.
Verbal threats reveal nothing beyond weakness and unreliability.
Remember, once again, no verbal threats.
The Assassins were an eleventh- through fourteenth-century sect related to Shiite Islam, and were (and still are through their reincarnations) violently anti-Sunni.
They were often associated with the Knights Templar as they fought frequently on the side of the crusaders - and if they seem to share some of the values of the Templars, in sparing the innocent and the weak, it is likely because the former group transmitted some of their values to the latter.
The chivalric code of honor has, for its second clause: I shall respect and defend the weak, the sick, and the needy.
The Assassins supposedly sent the same message to Saladin (the Kurdish ruler of Syria who conquered Jerusalem from the Crusaders), informing him that the cake he was about to eat was poisoned…by themselves.
The ethical system of the Assassins held that political assassination helped prevent war; threats of the dagger-by-your-bed variety are even better for bloodless control.
They supposedly aimed at sparing civilians and people who were not directly targeted.
Their precision was meant to reduce what is now called "collateral damage."
ASSASSINATION AS MARKETING
Those readers who may have tried to get rid of pebbles in their shoes (that is, someone who bothers you and doesn't get the hint) might know that "contracts" on ordinary citizens (that is, to trigger their funeral) are relatively easy to perform and inexpensive to buy.
There is a relatively active underground market for these contracts.
In general, you need to pay a bit more to "make it look like an accident."
However, skilled historians and observers of martial history would recommend the exact opposite: in politics, you should have to pay more to make it look intentional.
In fact, what Captain Mark Weisenborn, Pasquale Cirillo, and I discovered, when we tried doing a systematic study of violence (debunking the confabulatory thesis by Steven Pinker that we mentioned earlier, holding that violence has dropped), was that war numbers have been historically inflated…by both sides.
Both the Mongols (during their sweep across Eurasia in the Middle Ages) and their panicky victims had an incentive to exaggerate, which acted as a deterrent.
Mongols weren't interested in killing everybody; they just wanted submission, which came cheaply through terror.
Further, having spent some time perusing the genetic imprints of invaded populations, it is clear that if the warriors coming from the Eastern steppes left a cultural imprint, they certainly left their genes at home.
Gene transfer between areas happens by group migrations, inclement climate, and unaccommodating soil rather than war.
More recently, the Hama "massacre" in 1982 of Syrian jihadis by Assad senior caused documented casualties (by my estimation) at least an order of magnitude lower than what is reported; the rest came from inflation - numbers swelling over time from two thousand to close to forty thousand without significant new information.
Both the Syrian regime and its enemies had an interest in numbers being inflated.
Interestingly the number has continued to climb in recent years.
We will return to historians in Chapter 14, where we show how empirical rigor is quite foreign to their discipline.
ASSASSINATION AS DEMOCRACY
Now, political life; if the democratic system doesn't fully deliver governance - it patently doesn't, owing to cronyisms and the Hillary Monsanto-Malmaison style of covert legal corruption - we have known forever what does: an increased turnover at the top.
Count Ernst zu Münster's epigrammatic description of the Russian Constitution explains it: "Absolutism tempered by assassination."
While today's politicians have no skin in the game and do not have to worry so long as they play the game, they stay longer and longer on the job, thanks to the increased life expectancy of modern times.
France's caviar socialist François Mitterrand reigned for fourteen years, longer than many French kings; and thanks to technology he had more power over the population than most French kings.
Even a United States president, the modern kind of emperor (unlike Napoleon and the czars, Roman emperors before Diocletian were not absolutists) tends to last at least four years on the throne, while Rome had five emperors in a single year and four in another.
The mechanism worked: consider that all the bad emperors - Caligula, Caracalla, Elagabalus, and Nero - ended their careers either murdered by the Praetorian Guard or, in the case of Nero, dead by suicide in anticipation.
Recall that in the first four hundred years of empire, less than a third of emperors died a natural death, assuming these deaths were truly natural.
THE CAMERA FOR SKIN IN THE GAME
Thanks to the camera, you no longer need to put horses' heads in boutique hotels or villas in the Hamptons to own people.
You may no longer even need to assassinate anyone.
We used to live in small communities; our reputations were directly determined by what we did - we were watched.
Today, anonymity brings out the a**hole in people.
So I accidentally discovered a way to change the behavior of unethical and abusive persons without verbal threat.
Take their pictures.
Just the act of taking their pictures is similar to holding their lives in your hands and controlling their future behavior thanks to your silence.
They don't know what you can do with it, and will live in a state of uncertainty.
I discovered the magic of the camera in reestablishing civil/ethical behavior as follows.
One day, in the New York subway underground corridor, I hesitated for a few seconds trying to get my bearings in front of the list of exits.
A well-dressed man with a wiry build and neurotic personality started heaping insults at me "for stopping."
Instead of hitting him as a conversation starter, as I would have done in 1921, I pulled my cell out and took his picture while calmly calling him a "mean idiot, abusive to lost persons."
He freaked out and ran away from me, hiding his face in his hands to prevent further photographs.
Another time, a man in upstate New York got into my parking spot as I was backing into it.
I told him it was against etiquette, he acted as an a**hole.
Same thing, I silently photographed him and his license plate.
He rapidly drove away and liberated the parking spot.
Finally, near my house, there is a forest preserve banned to bicycles as they harm the environment.
Two mountain cyclists rode on it every weekend during my 4 P.M. walk.
I admonished them to no avail.
One day I calmly took a dozen pictures, making sure they noticed.
The bigger guy complained, but they then left rapidly.
They have never returned.
Of course, I destroyed their pictures.
But I never thought handhelds could be such a weapon.
And it would be unfair to use their pictures for web-mobbing.
In the past, bad deeds were only transmitted to acquaintances who knew how to put things in perspective.
Today, strangers, incapable of judging a person's general character, have become self-appointed behavior police.
Web-shaming is much more powerful than past reputational blots, and more of a tail risk.
In Book 2 of Plato's Republic, there is a discussion between Socrates and Plato's brother, Glaucon, about the ring of the Gyges, which gives its holder the power to be invisible at will and watch others.
Clearly Plato anticipated the later Christian contrivance "you are watched."
The discussion was whether people behave in a right manner because they are watched - or, according to Socrates, because of their character.
Of course we side with Socrates, but we will even go beyond, by defining virtue as something that goes beyond pleasing the watchers, and can actually irritate them.
Remember that Socrates was put to death because he would not compromise his standards.
More on that, in a few chapters, when we discuss real virtue.
Chapter 12 The Facts Are True, the News Is Fake
I never said that I said - No news is mostly news - Information flows in both directions
HOW TO DISAGREE WITH YOURSELF
In the summer of 2009, I partook of an hour-long public discussion with David Cameron, who was in the running for, and later became, the U.K. prime minister.
The discussion was about how to make society robust, even immune to Black Swans, what structure was needed for both decentralization and accountability, and how the system should be built, ce genre de trucs.
It was an interesting fifty-nine minutes around the topics of the Incerto, and I felt great communicating all the points in bulk for the first time.
The room in the elegant Royal Society for the Arts was full of journalists.
I subsequently went to a Chinese restaurant in (London's) Soho to celebrate with a few people when I received a phone call from a horrified friend.
All London newspapers were calling me a "climate denier," portraying me as part of a dark anti-environment conspiracy.
The entire fifty-nine minutes were summarized by the press and reported from a tangential comment that lasted twenty seconds taken in reverse of the intended meaning.
Someone who didn't attend the conference would have been under the impression that that was the whole conversation.
It turned out that I presented my version of the precautionary principle during the conversation, worth restating here.
It asserts that one does not need complex models as a justification to avoid a certain action.
If we don't understand something and it has a systemic effect, just avoid it.
Models are error-prone, something I knew well with finance; most risks only appear in analyses after harm is done.
As far as I know, we only have one planet.
So the burden is on those who pollute - or who introduce new substances in larger than usual quantities - to show a lack of tail risk.
In fact, the more uncertainty about the models, the more conservative one should be.
The same newspapers had lauded The Black Swan in which this very point was fleshed out clearly - so visibly the attack had nothing to do with the point I was making, rather they wanted to weaken Cameron by demonizing me.
I realized that they would have found another reason to tarnish me no matter what I said.
I managed to defend myself by making a lot of noise, and, with explicit legal threats, forced every newspaper to publish my correction.
Even then someone at The Guardian tried (unsuccessfully) to tone down my letter by showing that it was some type of disagreement with what I said, not a correction of their misrepresentation.
In other words, they wanted me to say that I was disagreeing with myself.
The London newspapers were actively misrepresenting something to their own public.
Someone who read the paper was mistaking the journalist for an intermediary between him- or herself and the product, the piece of news.
But if I eventually set the record straight, thanks to my bully pulpit, many can't do the same.
So clearly there is an agency problem.
There is no difference between a journalist at The Guardian and the restaurant owner in Milan, who, when you ask for a taxi, calls his cousin who does a tour of the city to inflate the meter before showing up.
Or the doctor who willfully misdiagnoses you to sell you a drug in which he has a vested interest.
INFORMATION DOESN'T LIKE TO BE OWNED
Journalism isn't Lindy compatible.
Information transmits organically by word of mouth, which circulates in a two-way manner.
In Ancient Rome, people got information without a centralized filter.
In the ancient Mediterranean marketplaces, people talked; they were the receivers and the purveyors of news.
Barbers offered comprehensive services; they doubled as surgeons, dispute-resolution experts, and news reporters.
If people were left to filter their own rumors, they were also part of the transmission.
Same with pubs and London coffee houses.
In the Eastern Mediterranean (currently Greece and the Levant), condolences were the source of gathering and transmission - and represented the bulk of social life.
Dissemination of the news took place at these gatherings.
My social grandmother would have her "rounds" of visits of condolences some days in Beirut's then-significant Greek Orthodox community, and knew practically everything down to the most insignificant details.
If the child of someone prominent flunked an exam, she knew it.
Practically every affair in town was detected.
Unreliable people carried less weight than reliable ones.
You can't fool people more than twice.
The period of time that corresponds to reliance on one-sided accounts such as television and newspapers, which can be controlled by the mandarins, lasted from the middle of the twentieth century until the U.S. election of 2016.
At that point, social networks, allowing a two-way flow of information, returned the mechanism of tidings to its natural format - Lindy had to strike.
As with participants in markets and souks, there is a long-term advantage to being dependable.
Further, such an agency problem as that of the current press is systemic, as its interests will keep diverging from that of its public until the eventual systemic blowup as we saw with the Bob Rubin trade.
As an illustration: I was less frustrated by the misinterpretation of my ideas than by the fact that no reader would have realized that 99 percent of my discussion with Cameron was about things other than climate change.
If the former could have been a misunderstanding, the latter is a structural defect.
And you never cure structural defects; the system corrects itself by collapsing.
The divergence is evident in that journos worry considerably more about the opinion of other journalists than the judgment of their readers.
Compare this to a healthy system, say, that of restaurants.
As we saw in Chapter 8, restaurant owners worry about the opinion of their customers, not those of other restaurant owners, which keeps them in check and prevents the business from straying collectively away from its interests.
Further, skin in the game creates diversity, not monoculture.
Economic insecurity worsens the condition.
Journalists are currently in the most insecure profession you can find: the majority live hand to mouth, and ostracism by their friends would be terminal.
Thus they become easily prone to manipulation by lobbyists, as we saw with GMOs, the Syrian wars, etc. You say something unpopular in that profession about Brexit, GMOs, or Putin, and you become history.
This is the opposite of business where me-tooism is penalized.
THE ETHICS OF DISAGREEMENT
Now let us get deeper into the application of the Silver Rule in intellectual debates.
You can criticize either what a person said or what a person meant.
The former is more sensational, hence lends itself more readily to dissemination.
The mark of a charlatan - say the writer and pseudo-rationalist Sam Harris - is to defend his position or attack a critic by focusing on some specific statement ("look at what he said") rather than blasting his exact position ("look at what he means" or, more broadly, "look at what he stands for") - for the latter requires an extensive grasp of the proposed idea.
Note that the same applies to the interpretation of religious texts, often extracted from their broader circumstances.
It is impossible for anyone to write a perfectly rationally argued document without a segment that, out of context, can be transformed by some dishonest copywriter to appear totally absurd and lend itself to sensationalization, so politicians, charlatans, and, more disturbingly, journalists hunt for these segments.
"Give me a few lines written by any man and I will find enough to get him hung" goes the saying attributed to Richelieu, Voltaire, Talleyrand, a vicious censor during the French revolution phase of terror, and a few others.
As Donald Trump said, "The facts are true, the news is fake" - ironically at a press conference in which he subsequently suffered the same selective reporting as my RSA event.
The great Karl Popper often started a discussion with an unerring representation of his opponent's positions, often exhaustive, as if he were marketing them as his own ideas, before proceeding to systematically dismantle them.
Also, take Hayek's diatribes Contra Keynes and Cambridge: it was a "contra," but not a single line misrepresents Keynes or makes an overt attempt at sensationalizing.
(It helped that people were too intimidated by Keynes's intellect and aggressive personality to risk triggering his ire.)
Read Aquinas's Summa Theologica, written eight centuries ago; you will notice sections titled "Questio," then "Praeteria," "Objectiones," "Sed Contra," etc., describing with a legalistic precision the positions being challenged and looking for a flaw in them before submitting a compromise.
If you notice a similarity with the Talmud, it is no accident: it appears that both methods originate with Roman legal reasoning.
Note the associated straw man arguments by which one not only extracts a comment but also provides an interpretation or promotes misinterpretation.
As an author, I consider straw man no different from theft.
Some types of lies in an open market cause others to treat the perpetrator as if he were invisible.
It is not about the lie; it is about the system that requires some modicum of trust.
For purveyors of calumnies did not survive in ancient environments.
The principle of charity stipulates that you try to understand a message as if you were yourself its author.
It, and revulsion at its violations, are Lindy compatible.
For instance, Isaiah 29:21 states: That make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought.
The wicked ensnare you.
Calumny was already a very severe crime in Babylon, where the person who made a false accusation was punished as if he committed the exact crime.
However, in philosophy, the principle of charity - as principle - is only sixty years old.
As with other things, if the principle of charity had to become a principle, it must be because some old ethical practices were abandoned.
NEXT
The next chapter will take us to virtue as skin in the game.
